Welcome... to another episode of Shiloh Creek....Where the water runs slow, the friends look out for each other, and every story starts here — pondside — with me.
I'm Old Timber....The elephant elder....And today's story... is the afternoon the sky tried to get the last word in.
Today... I want to ask you something, little ones....A question the wise people in the Bible used to ask each other a long, long time ago....What does it mean... to be brave?...Even when you're scared....Even when your voice is the quietest one in the room....Listen carefully....The answer's in the story.
Now... gather round, little ones. Come close by the pond.
[hesitant]...Old Timber?...Is this — is this the one with the...with the storm?
Mm....Yes, Fern....It is the one with the storm....The dear thing....Come a little closer....You come out of this one... taller.
[hesitant]...Taller?...Oh....Okay.
Now... settle in....Here we go.
Now, this was a month or so back, on one of those bright, soft afternoons in late summer when the meadow was warm and the creek was running slow and the sky overhead was the kind of blue that looks like it can't possibly change its mind....The grass smelled the way grass smells when it's been sitting in the sun all morning....Warm and a little dusty.
But somebody we know... had been looking at the horizon since breakfast....And what she had been looking at — quietly, the way she looks at most things — was a thin dark line....Just a line....The kind of line a fawn notices when nobody else does.
And out in the meadow,...the friends were going about their afternoon,...not looking at the horizon at all....The grass was warm....The big old oak was throwing a slow patch of shade....And nobody at all,...thought to look up.
Now, this is where things got interesting...
And over hopped Bongo the bear cub, with his usual cheerful crash,...full of an afternoon's worth of energy and not nearly enough things to do with it....He flopped down by the oak and announced —
[excited] Today I am going to FIX something....I don't know what yet....But I'm going to fix it....I got this....I got this, in advance.
And Zippy the hummingbird darted in, going so fast she was three places at once....She squeaked,
[excited] Bongo, I just had — okay — I just had FOUR ideas about things to fix!...Number one, the footbridge is one plank too short, number two, the signpost is two degrees crooked, number three — wait — wait — what was three?
And high in the branches of the big old oak sat Garingo the parrot, all bright feathers and dramatic flourish....He cleared his throat — politely, theatrically — and called down,
Friends!...I have observed something — I have observed it from up HERE, which is, as you know, the best place to observe things from — and I declare...the afternoon is PERFECT.
And at the edge of the clearing, half-tucked behind a fern frond bigger than her head, stood Fern the fawn — soft-eyed and a little shy, the way she stands....She had been there a while....She had been there longer than the others knew.
[hesitant]...Um....Um, I — I noticed something....A — a line....On the far side of the sky.
[excited] Wait — Garingo, you fly!...What does the SKY think?...Is the sky going to need fixing?...I bet I could fix the sky.
The sky?...The sky needs NOTHING....The sky is — and I say this from up HERE —...is in the FINEST of moods today.
...Mm....That is...a lot of blue, just there....Mm.
And from where she had been sitting all along, half in the warm grass and half in the warm shade, was Shelly the tortoise — wise old Shelly — looking, as she does, exactly where Fern had been looking....At the line on the far side of the sky....But Shelly...waited.
[excited] Okay — going back to the FOOTBRIDGE — I have a tool that — well — okay, it's not really a TOOL, it's more of a — it's more of a hand-drawn DIAGRAM of a tool —
And just then —...the wind changed.
[excited] Oh....OH....That's a — that's a different kind of wind....That's a — Garingo, what kind of wind is THAT?
...That is —...that is a HEALTHY wind....A — a vigorous wind....The sky is being EXPRESSIVE....That's all....That is all that is happening.
[hesitant]...Um....Um....The line....The line is — it's not a line anymore.
And the friends,...still standing around in their warm patch of grass,...still mostly not looking up,...did not hear Fern....She had spoken a little quieter than the wind....And the wind,...by this point,...had something to say.
[excited] WHOA — whoa — did anyone — did anyone hear that was — that was a — that was a SOUND from the SKY.
[excited] That's thunder!...That's thunder!...Okay — I have an idea — we need a DOME — I can build a DOME — a fast dome — out of — out of LEAVES — fast leaves — okay —
BEHOLD!...The SKY — the sky has —...the sky has decided to JOIN US....In CONVERSATION....A welcome guest....A welcome — a welcome — a welcome —...alright, that is a LOT of sky.
Now... by this point...the first proper drops were starting to fall....One....Then a few....Then —...well —...quite a lot....And down at the pond, the Mudpuppies — Splish and Splash and Splosh — were having the time of their lives in the brand-new puddles, of course....As Mudpuppies do.
[excited] AH!...Ah — that is RAIN....That is real rain....Friends, what's the plan?...Zippy — your dome — is the dome here yet — is the — I — I got this —...I don't got this....I don't got this at ALL.
Now... while the friends were all standing in the rain,...trying to think their way out of weather,...somebody we know —...the smallest voice in the meadow —...was thinking something different.
Fern... had been to the lookout at the top of the big hill many times, very quietly, all by herself....The lookout is a wide little cave — dry, sheltered, with a stone floor that stays cool even in summer....She had been there in spring....She had been there in summer....She knew the path....She knew the turns....She knew the dry corner inside....And right now, standing in the meadow with rain landing one drop at a time on her whiskers, she felt something new....A small warm thing in her chest....Like a smooth stone that had been sitting in the sun.
Mm....Watching Bongo standing there with rain on his ears,...watching Zippy still designing her dome,...watching Garingo,...the dear bird,...trying to make weather smaller by talking about it —...I remembered something....A line from the Bible....About being brave....About what bravery is really for.
And right there,...with the rain coming on,...Fern took a breath....A small one....The kind a fawn takes when she's about to do something the rest of her body would rather not.
...Friends....Friends.
[excited]...Fern?...Did you — did you just....Your voice....It sounded different just then....I'm sorry, I — I was — I was thinking about a dome.
I — I know where to go....There's a lookout....At the top of the big hill....It's dry....It's a cave....A small one....With a stone floor....I've been there lots....We can — we can fit....All of us.
[excited]...Wait....Wait....You KNOW where?...You have — you have an ACTUAL plan?
...Mm....She does, in fact....She's been there often....I've seen her go.
...Fern....Lead on....I — I shall NOT narrate this part....That was — that was poor narration earlier....I shall — I shall WALK....And LOOK....And BE QUIET.
And so —...with the rain coming down properly now, the kind of rain that lets you know it has plans for the afternoon —...Fern stepped up to the front of the small group of friends....And she said,
...Okay....Follow me....Stay close....The path turns left at the big rock, and then right at the split tree....If you get scared,...just hold on to whoever's in front of you....I'll go first.
[excited]...Okay, Fern....I — I got this....I mean — I — — okay, scratch that,...YOU got this....You — you got this....Let's go.
And they went....One fawn at the front,...one tortoise — bless her steady shell — at the back,...with a bear cub, a hummingbird, and a parrot in between....Up the path,...around the rock,...past the split tree,...up the hill,...to the lookout —...which was,...exactly as Fern had said,...dry....And big enough for everyone.
And once everybody was inside,...with the rain doing its work outside and the lookout doing its work inside,...with a wet leaf stuck to the side of Bongo's nose where he hadn't noticed it yet,...Bongo looked at Fern....And she was — well,...she was a little smaller than usual,...but a little taller, too.
...I — I was scared.
...Mm....I know.
...I came anyway.
Now, after all that —...once the rain had moved on and the sky had said what it needed to say and the world was that washed-clean kind of bright that only happens after a storm —...we wandered back over here to the pond....And I asked them, sitting all together in the new wet grass, — friends, what do you think it was, in the end, that made it work?
...I — I think it was the breath....The one I took....Before I said anything....Old Timber said...it was the breath a fawn takes when she's about to do something the rest of her body would rather not....I think — I think that's what bravery is....Just taking the breath....And going.
[excited]...Um....I think...I think it was when I stopped trying to fix it....Because I — I was about to fix the SKY....And the sky did not need fixing....The sky was — the sky was just being a sky....I was scared, too, you know....When the rain got real....I was scared of being so far from home.
...And I — I think it was when Fern said 'friends'....And the room got very quiet....The room had been very LOUD,...because I had been making it very loud....And the moment the smallest voice spoke up,...the loudness,...frankly,...had to go.
...Mm....Fern took the breath....And we all followed....That's how it usually goes....A small breath....A whole path.
...Hm....Now... isn't that something?...Funny how the loudest part of the afternoon was the sky....And the bravest part of the afternoon...was the smallest voice in the meadow.
And that, my little ones, is how I remember it....The afternoon a small voice took everybody up the big hill.
Now, before you go —...Professor Hoot has something he very much wants to tell us....He has a fact....The dear old soul,...he has a fact about being BRAVE....Heaven help us all.
Children....Gather round....Today, I shall be presenting...a Totally True Observation.....An observation, mind you,...not a fact....A fact would require...considerably more paperwork....And I have...mislaid my paperwork.
Ahem....The observation...is about COURAGE.....I have been observing courage....From a branch....A very fine branch, in fact —...you should see it —...the bark is exceptional —...where was I.
Right....Courage....I have been observing it....And what I have observed is — and please do brace yourselves —...it is, in the end,...quite small.
Yes....Quite small....Smaller than you'd think....Smaller, frankly, than my OWN feathers — which are, as you know,...considerable....And yet —...the small thing....DID THE BIG THING.
I shall be brief....Brief is one of my finest qualities....Along with precise....And concise....And...occasionally...succinct.
...In summary....Courage....It is small....It is...usually quieter than I am....Which is,...if I am being entirely honest,...most things.
Therefore....I shall stop talking.....Now....Class...dismissed....Actually —...one more thing —...the bark on that branch really is exceptional.
...Mm....Hoot got there in the end....The small thing did the big thing....That's not a bad observation....For a Tuesday.
[excited] Old Timber —...what did we learn today?
Mm....We learned, my little ones... that being brave is not being unafraid....Being brave is being scared....And going anyway....That's all bravery is....Just — going anyway.
And there's a line from the Bible, little ones....From the book of Joshua —...an old, old story from the Bible about a man who was scared and led his friends anyway —...that says:...'Be strong and of good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the Lord thy God is with thee whithersoever thou goest.'...Three thousand years old, give or take....'Be strong and of good courage.'...That's what Fern found out this afternoon....She was a little smaller than usual when she found it....And,...this small brave heart,...she was a little taller, too.
Until the next breeze brings us together, little ones....Be brave out there.
See you next time... somewhere in Shiloh Creek.